Tutorial from Manon but cute (#33)
scilus/nf-neuro-documentation: src/content/docs/advanced-tutorials/bidsoutput.mdx

---

> title: "BIDS output: PublishDir specifications"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "BIDS output `PublishDir` specifications"
```

                else if ( filename.contains("brain_mask.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_mask.nii.gz" }
                else if ( filename.contains("versions.yml") ) { null }
                else { params.lean_output ? null : filename }
            },
            path: { meta.session ? "${params.output}/${meta.id}/${meta.session}/anat/" : "${params.output}/${meta.id}/anat/" },
            enabled: params.lean_output ? false : true
        ]
    }
```

:::tip[Let's break down these changes]
<html>
<li>`publishDir`</li>
        The `publishDir` directive in Nextflow specifies where the output files from a process 
    should be saved. To match the BIDS format, we need to use dynamic paths that follow the BIDS directory structure.

    ```nextflow
    /<directory>/<subject>/<session>/<datatype>/<file>
    ```

Check the [BIDS derivatives specification](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/derivatives/introduction.html) for more details.

    Where:
    <dd>
        <li>**`subject`** is the identifier for the participant.</li>
        <li>**`session`** is the identifier for the session (if applicable).</li>

>         <li>**`datatype`** refers to the type of data (e.g., `anat`, `func`).</li>
>         <li>**`file`** is the actual output file (e.g., T1-weighted MRI image, functional MRI data).</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <li>**`datatype`** refers to the type of data (e.g., `anat`, `func`, `dwi`).</li>
        <li>**`file`** is the actual output file (e.g., T1-weighted MRI image, functional MRI data, diffusion MRI data).</li>
```

    </dd>

<li>`mode`</li>
        The `mode` of publishing is set by a parameter, allowing flexibility in how files are published (e.g., copy, symlink, etc.).
    Define here with `params.publish_dir_mode`.

> <li>`SaveAs`</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<li>`saveAs`</li>
```

        The `saveAs` function allows you to rename or reorganize output files as they are published. 
    This is particularly helpful when you need to ensure that your output files have BIDS-compliant filenames.

    It uses the following logic:

    <dd>
        <li>`def ses = meta.session ? "_${meta.session}" : ""`</li>
            It **checks** if there's a session in the metadata and creates a session string accordingly.

        <li>`if ( filename.contains("bet_image.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_bet.nii.gz" }`</li>
        For specific file types (bet_image.nii.gz and brain_mask.nii.gz), it **renames** them with a structured naming convention including metadata.

       <li>`if ( filename.contains("versions.yml") ) { null }`</li>
       It **excludes the versions.yml** file from being published.
    </dd>

    For other files, it either publishes them **as-is** or **excludes** them based on the `params.lean_output` setting.

<li>`path`</li>

>     This defines the directory structure for publishing outputs. 
>     The subject and session might be derived from the filenames or passed as inputs.
>     It includes the subject (`meta.id`), session (`meta.session`), and output (`params.output`).
>     Using `meta.session ? "path_with_meta_session" : "path_without_meta_session"` if no session is provided, the path will omit the session and just use the subject ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This defines the directory structure for publishing outputs. 
    The subject and session are derived from the subject's metadata.
    It includes the subject (`meta.id`), session (`meta.session`), and output (`params.output`).
    By using `meta.session ? "path_with_meta_session" : "path_without_meta_session"`, if no session is provided, the path will omit the session and create a simpler structure.
```

(This configuration **must be applied to each module** in your pipeline to ensure all outputs are properly organized).

Here is an example of the structure output :

```nextflow

    // Add those parameters after the params.output

    // Publish BIDS-like configuration
    params.lean_output = true
    params.publish_dir_mode = 'copy'

    // In process {} part

    withName: "BETCROP_SYNTHBET" {
        memory = "4G"
        ext.nocsf = false
        publishDir = [
            mode: params.publish_dir_mode,
            saveAs: {
                filename ->
                def ses = meta.session ? "_${meta.session}" : ""
                if ( filename.contains("bet_image.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_bet.nii.gz" }
                else if ( filename.contains("brain_mask.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_mask.nii.gz" }
                else if ( filename.contains("versions.yml") ) { null }
                else { params.lean_output ? null : filename }
            },
            path: { meta.session ? "${params.output}/${meta.id}/${meta.session}/anat/" : "${params.output}/${meta.id}/anat/" },

>             enabled: params.lean_output ? false : true

Reviewer: You can't use both filename matching within the `saveAs` and the `enabled` option. The last else is doing the job of `enabled` by not outputting the remaining files that are not matched by a pattern (or outputting them if `lean_output` is false). The actual `enabled` flag can only be used in intermediate steps, where you do not want any output files to be outputted in a "lean" setting.

    It uses the following logic:

    <dd>
        <li>`def ses = meta.session ? "_${meta.session}" : ""`</li>
            It **checks** if there's a session in the metadata and creates a session string accordingly.

        <li>`if ( filename.contains("bet_image.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_bet.nii.gz" }`</li>
        For specific file types (bet_image.nii.gz and brain_mask.nii.gz), it **renames** them with a structured naming convention including metadata.

       <li>`if ( filename.contains("versions.yml") ) { null }`</li>
       It **excludes the versions.yml** file from being published.
    </dd>

    For other files, it either publishes them **as-is** or **excludes** them based on the `params.lean_output` setting.

<li>`path`</li>
    This defines the directory structure for publishing outputs. 
    The subject and session might be derived from the filenames or passed as inputs.
    It includes the subject (`meta.id`), session (`meta.session`), and output (`params.output`).
    Using `meta.session ? "path_with_meta_session" : "path_without_meta_session"` if no session is provided, the path will omit the session and just use the subject ID.

> <li>`enabled`</li>
>     This enables or disables the publishing of outputs based on the `params.lean_output` parameter. 
>     If lean_output is true, publishing is disable : `params.lean_output ? false : true`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<li>`enabled`</li>
    This enables or disables the publishing of outputs based on the `params.lean_output` parameter. **It can only be used in intermediate steps, where you do not want any output files to be published in a "lean settings".**
    If `lean_output` is true, publishing is disabled : `params.lean_output ? false : true`
```

This configuration allows for fine-grained control over how files are renamed, where they are stored, 
and whether they are published based on specific parameters such as lean_output.
    </html>
:::

> Make sure to apply this structure to every process in your pipeline that produces output to ensure that all data is 
> organized consistently, making it easier to integrate with other BIDS-compliant tools and workflows.Additionally, 
> by defining the appropriate metadata and passing the required parameters, you can easily reorganize 
> your output files and make them ready for further analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure to apply this structure to every process in your pipeline that produces output to ensure that all data is 
organized consistently, making it easier to integrate with other BIDS-compliant tools and workflows. Additionally, 
by defining the appropriate metadata and passing the required parameters, you can easily reorganize 
your output files and make them ready for further analysis.
```

                    if ( filename.contains("denoised.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-denoised_dwi.nii.gz" }
                    else if ( filename.contains("versions.yml") ) { null }
                },
                path: { meta.session ? "${params.output}/${meta.id}/${meta.session}/dwi/" : "${params.output}/${meta.id}/dwi/" }
            ]
        }

        withName: "BETCROP_SYNTHBET" {
            memory = "4G"
            ext.nocsf = false
            publishDir = [
                mode: params.publish_dir_mode,
                saveAs: {
                    filename ->
                    def ses = meta.session ? "_${meta.session}" : ""
                    if ( filename.contains("bet_image.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_bet.nii.gz" }
                    else if ( filename.contains("brain_mask.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_mask.nii.gz" }
                    else if ( filename.contains("versions.yml") ) { null }
                    else { params.lean_output ? null : filename }
                },
                path: { meta.session ? "${params.output}/${meta.id}/${meta.session}/anat/" : "${params.output}/${meta.id}/anat/" },

>                 enabled: params.lean_output ? false : true

Reviewer: Remove that

                    else if ( filename.contains("map_wm.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_map_wm.nii.gz" }
                    else if ( filename.contains("map_gm.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_map_gm.nii.gz" }
                    else if ( filename.contains("mask_csf.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_mask_csf.nii.gz" }
                    else if ( filename.contains("mask_wm.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_mask_wm.nii.gz" }
                    else if ( filename.contains("mask_gm.nii.gz") ) { "${meta.id}_${ses}_desc-t1_mask_gm.nii.gz" }
                    else { params.lean_output ? null : filename }
                },
                path: { meta.session ? "${params.output}/${meta.id}/${meta.session}/anat/" : "${params.output}/${meta.id}/anat/" }
            ]
            ]
        }
    }
```

### 3. Run nextflow

<RunIcon class="inline-icon text-blue-300" aria-hidden /> **Now, you can run nextflow..**

<CommandOutputs>
   <span slot="command">
    ```bash
    nextflow run main.nf --input data -profile docker -resume
    ```
   </span>
   <span slot="output">
    ```bash
    ```

>    </span>

Reviewer: This is empty

</CommandOutputs>

:::note
Note that once the pipeline has run, you can experiment with different `publishDir` options by using the 
resume feature and changing the `params.output` parameter to `result_2` or another directory. 
Nextflow will simply copy the images from the work directory to the new output folder, following the output definitions you have set.
:::

:::caution

> Do cannot set both a `global` publishDir (`publishDir = { "${params.output}/$meta.id/${task.process.replaceAll(':', '-')}" }`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You cannot set both a `global` publishDir (`publishDir = { "${params.output}/$meta.id/${task.process.replaceAll(':', '-')}" }`)
```
